---
title: "SNMP"
date: 2022-03-27 12:00:00 +0000
categories: networking
tags: snmp linux  snmpv1 snmpv2c snmpv3 smpd
description: >- # this means to ignore newlines until "baseurl:"
  In this article we will explore Simple Network Management, SNMP and how to implement version 1, 2c and 3 using a Linux server.
---

In this article we will explore Simple Network Management, SNMP and how to implement version 1, 2c and 3 using a Linux server.

## What is SNMP

SNMP stands for Simple Network Management Protocol, it is a protocol for collecting and organising information about managed devices.

SNMP is widely used for network monitoring and exposes management data in the form of variables. The variables are organised in hierarchies known as **Management Information Base (MIB)**. MIBs describe the structure of the management data of a device, contained within these structures are **Object Identifiers (OID)**. Each OID identifies a variable that can be read or set via SNMP.

SNMP operates in the **application layer (layer 7)** and all messages are transported via **UDP** *(default value)*. Agents receive requests on **port 161** and managers are sent traps on port 162.

In a managed network there are three key components:

1. **Managed Device**
2. **Agent** - Management Agent (MA), runs on the managed device.
3. **Manager** - Network Management Station (NMS)

Information can be received in two ways, the first is polling and the second are known as traps.

1. **Polling** - Information is requested by the manager from the agent, this occurs on a regular basis.
2. [**Trap**](https://www.solarwinds.com/resources/it-glossary/snmp-traps) - Information to sent from the agent to the manager. Traps unrequested data that are sent when triggered by an event.

### Versions

There are [three versions of SNMP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Simple_Network_Management_Protocol), they are;

* **Version 1** - Initial implementation with trivial authentication and community name is transmitted in clear text.
* **Version 2c** - Version 2 was a revision of version 1 which contained improvements in the areas of performance, security and manager-to-manager communications, this version was deemed obsolete by version 2c.
  * **SNMPv2c** - Community-Based SNMP version 2
  * **SNMPv2u** - User-Based SNMP version 2 - Adopted into Version 3
* **Version 3** - no changes to the protocol aside from the addition of cryptographic security. Version 3 support User-based Security Model (USM) and tunnelling over SSH

## SNMP Agent - Linux Debian Family

Install the SNMP daemon package.

```bash
sudo apt install -y snmpd
```

### SNMP version 1 and 2c

Now we will edit SNMPs configuration file to configure a few aspects

```bash
sudo nano /etc/snmp/snmpd.conf
```

#### Listen Address

The listen address, listed as `agentaddress` defines the IP address (interface), protocol and port used by agent.

The below will configure the server to listen on all IPv4 and IPv6 addresses

```text
agentaddress udp:161,udp6:[::1]:161
```

The entry below will listen on a specific IPv4 address

```text
agentaddress udp:192.168.1.10:163
```

#### Community String

Configure the SNMPv1 and v2c read-only community string for IPv4 and IPv6, it is good practice to change "public" to your preferred community string.

This will expose all management data.

```text
rocommunity public default
rocommunity6 public default
```

*To set a read-write community we would use `rwcommunity`, although this is not recommended to enable.*

#### Limiting and Views

We can limit SNMP by using the hostname or network and limit to specific OIDs or use View.

```bash
rocommunity communityName [default|hostname|network/bits] [oid | -V view]
```

If we wanted to limit to a specific host, for example a NMS on 192.168.1.2.

```text
rocommunity communityName 192.168.1.2
```

or a network

```text
rocommunity communityName 192.168.1.0/24
```

If we wanted to limit to a specific OID.

```text
rocommunity communityName default .1.3.6.1.2.1.1.5.0
```

Views are created within the `snmpd.conf` file, below is an example.

OIDs can be included or excluded.

```text
#  system + hrSystem groups only
view   systemonly  included   .1.3.6.1.2.1.1
view   systemonly  included   .1.3.6.1.2.1.25.1
view   systemonly  excluded   .1.3.6.1.2.1.1.5.0
```

 The example below, provides everyone access to the "systemonly" views, only one view should be declared.

```text
rocommunity public default -V systemonly
```

Now restart the daemon

```bash
sudo systemctl restart snmpd
```

#### SNMP Walk v1 and v2c

[SNMPWalk](https://linux.die.net/man/1/snmpwalk) is an application that uses `SNMP GETNEXT` requests to query a network entity for a tree of information. It can be used on another system *(SNMP Manager)* to query the server *(SNMP Agent)*.

A simple use case is to test our SNMP agents.

```bash
snmpwalk -v 2c -c communityName 192.168.1.90
```

### SNMP version 3

"SNMPv3 was originally defined using the User-Based Security Model (USM), which contains a private list of users and keys specific to the SNMPv3 protocol. The operational community, however, declared it a pain to manipulate yet another database and was decided to tunnel SNMP over SSH and DTLS to make use of existing user and authentication infrastructures." - [snmpd.conf man page](http://www.net-snmp.org/docs/man/snmpd.conf.html)

#### SNMPv3 USM

There are a few things to note with SNMPv3 they are:

* The EngineID uniquely identifies an SNMP entity, this will be randomly generated if not provided
* MD5 and SHA are the authentication types, while DES and AES are the privacy (encryption) protocols.
* The minimum pass phrase length is 8 characters.

**The preferred option is to use the SNMP create tool, which is below**

Now we can create a user, below is the manual page command

```bash
createUser [-e ENGINEID] username (MD5|SHA|SHA-512|SHA-384|SHA-256|SHA-224) authpassphrase [DES|AES] [privpassphrase]
```

This command would be written into `/var/lib/snmp/snmpd.conf`

```bash
createUser -e DeviceID Username SHA-512 UserPassword AES EncryptionPassword
```

And we would need to place into our `/etc/snmp/snmpd.conf` file.

```text
rouser snmpuser authPriv
```

Finally restart the `snmpd` daemon

```bash
sudo systemctl restart snmpd
```

#### Using the SNMP create tool

Instead of figuring out how to use this directive and where to put it, just use the `net-snmp-create-v3-user` tool instead, which will add these lines to the right place.

First stop the `snmpd` daemon

```bash
sudo systemctl snmpd stop
```

```text
net-snmp-create-v3-user -ro -A UserPassword -a SHA -X EncryptionPassword -x AES Username
```

**Issue** - No such file or directory

```bash
root@server:/etc/snmp# net-snmp-create-v3-user -ro -A UserPassword -a SHA-512 -x EncryptionPassword -X AES Username

adding the following line to /var/lib/snmp/snmpd.conf:
   createUser snmpuser SHA "UserPassword" AES "EncryptionPassword"
   
adding the following line to /snmp/snmpd.conf:
   rouser snmpuser
   
touch: cannot touch '/snmp/snmpd.conf': No such file or directory
/usr/bin/net-snmp-create-v3-user: 144: cannot create /snmp/snmpd.conf: Directory nonexistent
```

This is a known issue, a workaround is to create the requested directory, re-run the command then move the created content over.

```bash
mkdir /snmp
```

Or manually add the content

```bash
sudo nano /etc/snmp/snmpd.conf
```

Scroll down to the bottom and add

```text
rouser snmpuser authPriv
```

Lastly restart SNMP

```bash
sudo systemctl start snmpd
```

#### SNMP Walk v3

To test SNMPv3 using `snmpwalk` we need a different set of switches, below is an example.

Its important that everything is present within the command, otherwise results will not be returned, instead you may get errors or host timed out.

```bash
snmpwalk -v3 -u Username -A UserPassword -a SHA-512 -l authPriv -x AES -X EncryptionPassword 192.168.1.x
```
